In this lecture, we will take about
invertibility of stochastic processes.
It's going to be Introduction
to Invertibility.
So objective is to learn invertibility
of a stochastic process.
So let's look at these Two MA(1),
Moving Average of all through one models.
Model 1 is Xt = Zt + 2Zt-1,
Model 2 will have instead of
2 will have half of Zt-1.
So what we want to do first,
we'd like to point out the covariance
function of model one.
What is the definition of
auto covariance function?
Gamma (k) is basically covariance,
with an Xt plus k and Xt, right?
So, basically the gamma (k) depends
on the difference between the steps,
not Xt, not Xt + k.
But k, the number of the lags in
between those two random variables.
And we put the definition of Xt + k
into it for model 1 and xt and three
which ez plus 2 zt minus 1 and then we try
to use the covariance, we expand this.
Now the recipe takes the covariance
of zt plus k with the zt,
zt plus k with zt minus 1.
This term, with zt and
the same term with 2 zt minus 1.
Now realize the full level,
if k is greater than 1,
which would mean that t plus k minus
1 is greater than t, in other words,
these guys are actually uncorrelated.
There is no covary that
correlates the 0 between them.
In other words, if k is greater than 1,
our gamma k is 0.
This is
Theoretical Auto Covariance Function.
Now if k is 0, exactly 0, that would
mean we are looking at gamma 0, right.
And gamma 0 is basically the variance,
the variance of this expression.
And we can see that this is
basically covariance Zt Zt,
and covariance Zt Z2- 1 is going to
be 0 because they are uncorrelated.
Zt- 1, Zt will be 0, but that Zt-
1 will have another variance here.
The first Covariant will be most Gamma.
I'm sorry Sigma squared and
this one another Sigma squared and
then we'll get five Sigma squared.
The Sigma is standard deviation
of the disturbance for
k = 1, we write the definition of xt + 1,
which is Zt+1 + 2Zt, we expand it,
there's only correlated guys are 2Zt and
Zt, and that will give us 2 sigma square.
If k is negative of course, gamma k,
this is the covariance,
it's even function of K, so
gamma K is same thing as gamma negative K
.So if i write auto covariance function.
Auto covariance function looks like
this starting problem from lag two so
great than lag one.
Starting with Lag 2.
We have n covariance, no auto covariance.
K1, in other words, the conveyors
would like one and two sigmas squared.
And then the covariance with
itself is five sigma squared.
And then for negative one,
we just the symmetric.
This is gamma negative K.
And if I want to find out the correlation
fun, function, in other words, A,
C, F,
all I have to do is basically divide.
Gamma (k) to gamma (0), that's the
definition of auto correlation function.
And the gamma (k) is basically,
I divided everything by 5 sigma squared.
This becomes 0.
This becomes 2 / 5, 1 and
this is auto correlation for -k.
So this is our auto correlation function.
So if I graph this we have autocorrelation
always at lag 0 which is self
the XT has a correlation 1 with itself,
of course.
And then we have some
autocorrelation in lag 1, then it.
Right?
This is basically a famous picture for
An ACF of an MA model.
If you have MA1 model, then ACF has
to cut off starting from one on.
Okay, now if I look at all
the correlation part of model 2, so
I'm going to skip a few steps here.
If we are concentrated on rho 1,
the correlation with other
correlation with lag one.
This is gamma 1 over gamma 0.
This is all gamma 1, this is gamma 0.
instead of 2s now we have halves.
If we calculate this, it becomes 2 over 5.
So if you write ACF of the model 2,
we get exactly the same ACF of model 1.
So if we have now two different models
Model 1, Model 2, they only differ with
this coefficient 2 and a half, but both of
them has an ACF which is exactly the same.
Now, if you are trying to
model a time series, and
if you believe that ACF
[INAUDIBLE] at some point,
then you try to model it with MAQ models,
right, MA 1, MA 2.
But, if ACF, a few more and
make queue process would have the same
ACF that would be problematic to model.
So we would like to somehow eliminate
one of these models in some way.
So ACFs are same, there's exactly
the same ACF, Model 1 and Model 2.
Okay.
So let's pause that thought a little bit.
So we're going to come back and
eliminate one of those models.
But how you're going to eliminate.
So let's talk about this invertibility,
inverting.
So what are we going to do,
we going to take general MA1 process now
that we have Xt which is equal
to Zt plus some beta and
our models beta was either half or
two, okay.
What we're going to do.
We're going to find Zt from here, so
Zt is going to basically Xt- beta Z- 1.
All right, but then instead of Zt- 1,
we will use the same relation,
this precursor relation.
Instead of Zt- 1, if we use this.
Put t instead of t minus.
Instead of t put t-1,
this is going to be Xt-1, beta Zt-2, and
replace Zt-1 with that expression.
And expand it.
We get Xt minus beta Xt-1,
plus beta squared Zt-2.
In other words,
Zt now is expressed as Xt and
Xt-1, plus some In step 2.
And then we can continue.
Instead of zt2.
We can put again, xt minus 2 minus beta.
Xz t minus 3, and so forth.
We can continue with this,
in theory, until infinity.
Then we'll, sorry.
So we can continue this until infinity.
What do we obtain?
We obtain Zt is equal to Xt- Bxt- 1
+ B squared xt- 2- B cubed xt- 3.
And it goes on and on and on.
Right?
So what does this mean?
Now the rest if you find xt here, xt = zt
+ linear combination, but this is series,
it's not a linear combination anymore.
Infinite series, and xt is on every
exterior value in the past, right.
So you can think of this AR processes
are the regressive process.
But the order, well it doesn't matter, the
order is infinity, this is AR infinity.
Process.
So what did we do?
Well, we kind of inverted MA(1) process
into other with order infinity.
Here's the one thing you have to
keep in mind, this is a series here,
there's an infinite series here.
And whenever we see an infinite series,
we have to Keep in mind that it might be
convergent or divergent,you have to make
sure that is actually
convergent in some sense.
Okay, now I'm going repeat the same
thing using Backward shift operator,
let's utilize Backward shift operator.
For Ma1 process, Xt can be written as
Beta(B)Zt, and where is my Beta(B)?
Beta(B) is basically 1 + Beta B.
That's our polynomial operator acting on
Zt, and that will give us Ma1 process.
Now, I would like to somehow
write Zt in terms of Xt.
So what am I going to do?
I'm going to find inverse operator So
if the Beta B is our polynomial operator,
somehow if I can find inverse operator,
and put in the inverse operator
into the left-hand side,
then Zt is expressed some
inverse operator, acting on Xt.
In other words,
Zt will be expressed in terms of Xts.
Okay.
So what is a Beta B inverse?
Well, Beta B is 1 plus Beta B.
And we can write this as
1 over 1 plus Beta B.
This is not fraction.
This is basically inverse
operator of 1 plus Beta B.
And what we're going to
do is the following.
We're going to act like this Beta B Is
a complex number for a minute.
Assume that it's not actually an operator.
It's a complex number.
Think of z, and then expand this.
This is the usual geometric expansion.
This is geometric series.
1 minus r plus r squared minus, I'm sorry.
1 R, R is negative beta B.
So it's going to be 1 plus R
plus R square plus R cubed but
then since I have 1 minus negative
beta B here sign will alternate.
So this is our inverse operator and
if we act this operator this
Z inverse operator on our X,
T then we will obtain well one Well,
this is not really one.
This is Xt, so this is a typo here.
This operator is acting on Xt,
1 acting on Xt.
The Xt, and then this is going to
give us Xt minus 1 and so forth.
In either way we invert that
Ma1 process into ar infinity.
And we express Zt as infinite sum of Xts
with some weight in front of them, right?
So how do we make sure that this
series is actually convergent series?
Well it turns out That that series
is convergent in some sense,
this is random variables,
adding them up, so we have to talk
about convergence of random variables.
This is not usual sequence, series.
It is random variables involved here.
There's this notion called mean-square
convergence Which is an option that
medial will be there about
this mean square root is.
But we actually proved this resolved.
But for now let's use this as a black box.
This series is convergent.
It means squared tens.
If and only if absolute value of beta,
absolute value of beta is less than Okay
let's get a definition of invertibility.
In general,
it make t as a stochastic process.
It doesn't have to be [INAUDIBLE].
Xt is a stochastic process and
think of Z is a notation right?
It's random disperse of
white noise [INAUDIBLE].
They say Xt is invertible.
If Zt can be expressed as infinite series.
Pie K, Xt minus k.
K goes from zero to infinity.
This is like AR infinity process,
where This pk is the sum of the absolute
value of pk's is convergent.
Now there was a series just of
pk's are absolutely convergent.
This is the definition of
invertibility of a stochastic process.
Now in our model one,
let's go back to our model one, model two.
Remember those are the two models we have.
It's tame ACF who wants
to eliminate one of them.
If you look at model one our pi
k going to be since beta is 2,
it's going to be sum of 2 the k.
And this series really diverges here.
But if you look at Model 2,
the [INAUDIBLE] case is 1 over 2.
If you look at some of the 1 over
2 to the k, we talked about this,
this is a geometric series, and
it is a convergence series.
So what are we going to do?
We're going to eliminate Model 1 and
go with Model 2.
Somehow we will assume
that we would like to
have our model to have
something worth splitting.
Okay, so model choice.
For invertibility to hold,
we choose Model 2 since the absolute
value 1 over 2 is less than 1.
In this way,
our ACF uniquely determines the MA
process that we've been looking for.
So what have you learn?
You have learned that definition of
invertibility of a stochastic process.
And then we learned the invertibility
condition Guarantees that
unique MA process corresponding to
the observed Author Correlation Function,
in other words, ACF.